**DeepLens**

### **Overview**

John Snow Labs’ **DeepLens** **(Medical Chatbot)** product is a secure,
domain-specific conversational AI platform built exclusively for
healthcare. It combines proprietary medical language models and NLP
pipelines to deliver accurate question-answering, clinical note
summarization, and structured outputs for healthcare use cases. Unlike
general chatbots, DeepLens is **tuned to medical terminology and
context**, allowing it to chat directly with clinical documents (EHR
notes, PDFs, guidelines, clinical trial protocols, internal reports) and
provide **evidence-backed** answers or summaries. It cites trusted
sources for every answer – ensuring explainability and dramatically
reducing the risk of hallucinations. DeepLens runs **privately in secure
environments** (on-premises or VPC) with no data leaving your
infrastructure, supporting HIPAA and GDPR compliance by design. In
short, DeepLens enables healthcare organizations to deploy **LLM-powered
assistants** that are medically knowledgeable, **traceably accurate, and
safe** for regulated use.

### **Use Cases**

DeepLens unlocks a wide range of high-impact healthcare use cases across
providers, life sciences, and patient services:

- 

- **Patient Support & Virtual Care:** Provide patients with
  evidence-based medical information by synthesizing published
  literature, clinical guidelines, and authoritative drug databases.
  DeepLens Agents answer complex medical questions about conditions,
  treatments, and medications, explaining drug side effects,
  interactions, and dosing guidelines while interpreting clinical
  research in patient-friendly language. Patients can explore treatment
  outcomes, compare therapeutic approaches based on published studies,
  and understand prognosis data from current scientific evidence.
  DeepLens will emphasize educational purposes and encourage
  consultation with healthcare professionals for personalized medical
  advice.

- **Clinician Assistance & Workflow Automation:** Assist healthcare
  professionals by summarizing and retrieving information from patient
  documentation, guidelines, and reference texts. DeepLens can digest a
  patient’s EHR notes or discharge summary or extract billing codes
  (ICD-10, CPT) from free-text for coding support. It serves as a
  “co-pilot” for doctors by quickly answering clinical questions (“What
  were this patient’s last lab results?”) or suggesting care plan steps
  based on available guidelines, all with citations to the source
  documentation. For example, providers can query unstructured notes and
  have DeepLens return relevant facts in seconds instead of combing
  through records.

- **Biomedical Research & Pharma:** Transform literature reviews from
  weeks to minutes. DeepLens provides a PubMed-style search interface
  where researchers can query scientific literature, apply precise
  filters, and define specific data extraction targets. The platform
  automatically analyzes hundreds or thousands of papers, summarizing
  key findings while preserving source evidence for validation. Results
  can be exported to CSV for further analysis, enabling rapid systematic
  reviews. Additional capabilities include document Q&A for large files
  (like 50-page clinical protocols) and automated monitoring of new
  publications with daily alerts.

These use cases share a common theme: DeepLens provides **accurate,
context-aware, and explainable** conversational intelligence in
scenarios where generic chatbots struggle with medical jargon, privacy
requirements, and the need for structured, reliable output.

### **Key Features & Capabilities**

**Healthcare-Tuned Language Models:** DeepLens is powered by John Snow
Labs’ proprietary **Medical LLMs**, which are trained on vast biomedical
corpora and clinical texts. These models are expert in medical
terminology, clinical semantics, and reasoning. DeepLens uses these
domain-specific models to understand complex medical questions and
documents far better than general GPT-style models. It can handle
medical conversations, literature content, and clinical Q&A with a high
degree of accuracy.

**Integrated Knowledge Bases:** The chatbot comes with up-to-date
medical knowledge built in. It offers access to over **225+ Million**
research articles, clinical trials, clinical guidelines, drug databases,
NPPES-certified professionals, and many more. DeepLens updates its
knowledge base **daily** with the latest medical research results,
ensuring answers reflect current domain status. For enterprise
deployments, customers can plug in **knowledge** from proprietary
sources such as institutional guidelines, internal reports, patient
records, etc. This guarantees that responses are not only up-to-date but
also contextually relevant to the organization’s data.

**Document Q&A and Summarization:** DeepLens allows users to upload and
interact with documents in various formats (txt, PDF, Word documents,
etc.). It can analyze up to 10 documents in one session, **summarize
their content, or answer specific queries by extracting relevant
information**. For example, a clinician could upload a patient’s records
and ask for historical information such as previous diagnosis,
medications or treatments. The chatbot will analyze the text, then
generate a summary highlighting the diagnoses, treatments, and next
steps, with cited references to the original text. This capability
extends to lengthy research papers or multi-page guidelines – DeepLens
reads them so you don’t have to, delivering key points on demand.

**Structured Output Generation:** A standout feature is DeepLens’s
ability to produce **structured, deterministic outputs** from free-text
inputs. It can perform **entity extraction and coding** – mapping
clinical phrases to standard codes such as **ICD-10-CM, SNOMED CT,
LOINC, RxNorm**, etc. For instance, given a clinical note describing a
condition, DeepLens can identify the condition and output the correct
ICD-10 code for billing. This is enabled by the integration of John Snow
Labs’ Healthcare NLP library, which includes over 2,500 pre-trained
medical NLP models and resolution algorithms. The result is a chatbot
that not only “chats,” but can deliver answers in a structured,
machine-readable form – crucial for downstream systems like EHRs,
billing, or care management.

**Safety and Explainability:** DeepLens was designed with **responsible
AI guardrails** to ensure safe deployment in healthcare contexts. Every
answer includes citations that link back to the original sources (e.g.
journal articles, guidelines), so users can verify information. This
transparency significantly mitigates the risk of hallucinations – the
model is encouraged to “show its work” and refrain from making
unsupported claims. The system also employs hallucination prevention
techniques and **content filtering** to avoid inappropriate or
non-compliant outputs. PHI (protected health information) leakage is
prevented by containing all data processing within the user’s
environment. Additionally, **smart reference ranking** is used: if
multiple sources are found, the chatbot will prioritize high-quality,
relevant references (for example, a peer-reviewed study over a random
web snippet). These safety features, combined with John Snow Labs’ focus
on healthcare AI ethics, make DeepLens a **trustworthy assistant**.
Clinicians remain in control: they can always trace an answer back to
evidence, and a human-in-the-loop can validate outputs when needed for
critical decisions.

**Scalability & Customization:** DeepLens is enterprise-ready. It can be
deployed as a scalable cloud service or on-premises, supporting
**millions of document interactions** and concurrent chats as usage
grows. The backend is optimized for performance – for example, utilizing
efficient embeddings and indices to handle large knowledge bases with
minimal latency. The solution supports **team-based access control**:
organizations can manage users, roles, and permissions so that, for
example, one department’s private data remains isolated from another’s.
DeepLens also provides an API, enabling integration into existing
applications or EHR interfaces. Furthermore, it’s customizable in tone
and behavior; health systems can configure the bot’s “persona” and
guardrails to align with their brand voice and clinical policies. This
flexibility ensures that DeepLens can adapt to various clinical
workflows – whether as a web chat for patient support, a
clinician-facing assistant in an EHR, or a backend service powering a
mobile health app.

### **Performance & Benchmarks**

DeepLens’s medical language models have demonstrated **state-of-the-art
performance on clinical NLP tasks** compared to general-purpose LLMs
like GPT-4 or Claude. In multiple benchmarks, the healthcare-specific
approach consistently yields higher accuracy, relevance, and safety:

- **Clinical Question Answering:** In a blinded evaluation on real-world
  clinical Q&A, John Snow Labs’ Healthcare GPT model (used in DeepLens)
  **outperformed OpenAI’s GPT-4 by a wide margin**. Independent medical
  experts rated answers for medical correctness, explanation, and
  completeness: the domain-tuned model achieved **91% correctness &
  explainability versus only 43% for GPT-4**, and similarly scored **91%
  vs 66%** on completeness of answers. Even writing style (clarity and
  tone) was rated higher (81% vs 72%) for the healthcare-specific model.
  These results show that DeepLens delivers answers that are not only
  more accurate but also more aligned with clinical communication
  standards than a general chatbot.

- **Clinical Summarization & Information Extraction:** In internal tests
  summarizing patient cases and extracting key facts, clinicians
  preferred DeepLens’s outputs nearly **2x more often** over GPT-4’s.
  For instance, in one study of summarizing medical notes, a John Snow
  Labs 8-billion-parameter model fine-tuned for medicine was the
  preferred output for factual accuracy in **47% of cases vs 25% for
  GPT-4**. It was also judged more **clinically relevant (48% vs 25%)
  and concise (42% vs 25%)**. Likewise for structured extraction tasks
  (like pulling diagnoses and procedures from a note), the healthcare
  model showed a **10–13% higher success rate** on factuality and
  brevity. These gains highlight the impact of domain-specific
  fine-tuning: DeepLens understands context that a general model misses,
  resulting in more precise and useful summaries.

- **Medical Coding (ICD-10 Assignment):** DeepLens’s underlying NLP
  components have proven far more effective at mapping clinical text to
  codes than zero-shot GPT models. In a head-to-head comparison for
  assigning **ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes from clinical notes**, John Snow
  Labs’ solution achieved a **76% accuracy**, whereas GPT-4 managed only
  **36%** (and GPT-3.5 just 26%). The general GPT often failed to
  extract many entities and hallucinated incorrect codes, while the
  specialized pipeline reliably detected all conditions and matched them
  to the correct codes. This is a crucial benchmark for healthcare, as
  coding accuracy affects billing and analytics; DeepLens’s high
  performance here underscores its suitability for real clinical data
  tasks.

- **Domain vs. Generalist Model Trade-off:** It’s noted that large
  general models like GPT-4 or Claude can have broad knowledge, but they
  still lag on expert medical tasks. For example, in one evaluation of
  medical question answering, GPT-4 answered only **55.8%** of questions
  correctly, even less than another general model (Claude at 64.3%), and
  far behind physicians who scored 82.3%. By contrast, John Snow Labs’
  fine-tuned medical model was able to **close much of this gap**, often
  matching or exceeding GPT-4 in domain-specific accuracy. In fact,
  JSL’s 8B-parameter **MedS model surpassed GPT-4’s factuality by
  5–10%** across summarization, extraction, and Q&A tasks. This
  demonstrates that **bigger isn’t always better** – a right-sized model
  with the right training can beat a larger model on healthcare
  benchmarks while also being deployable within hospital IT constraints.
  DeepLens leverages this optimized model to deliver high accuracy
  **on-premise**.

In summary, **DeepLens consistently outperforms generic LLMs in
healthcare evaluations** – providing more correct answers, fewer
omissions, and safer responses. These performance advantages have been
validated in peer-reviewed settings and by clinical professionals. The
result for end users is a chatbot that you can trust to be **more
factual, concise, and clinically relevant** than general AI, which is
critical for patient care scenarios.

### **Deployment & Compliance**

DeepLens is designed for **flexible deployment in enterprise healthcare
environments** while meeting stringent privacy and security
requirements:

- **On-Premises or Secure Cloud:** The solution can be accessed as a
  **SaaS** **service** or deployed within customer infrastructure. Many
  organizations choose to run DeepLens in a **HIPAA-compliant Virtual
  Private Cloud** or on-premises data center. The entire chatbot stack
  (LLMs, knowledge bases, NLP pipelines, and Chat UI) can function in an
  **air-gapped environment without internet access or external API
  calls**, ensuring sensitive health data never leaves your control.
  This allows hospitals and pharma companies to integrate DeepLens
  behind firewalls and comply with internal security policies. For
  instance, John Snow Labs partnered with Oracle to deploy the SaaS
  version on high-performance OCI infrastructure – achieving *ultra-low
  latency and advanced security* in a fully isolated cloud tenancy.
  Organizations on AWS or Azure can similarly deploy in their private
  cloud. The **Enterprise edition** of DeepLens is explicitly built for
  on-prem use, supporting containerized or VM-based installs with
  Kubernetes scaling.

- **Compliance and Certification:** Every component of DeepLens is built
  with **healthcare compliance** in mind. John Snow Labs is an
  established leader in healthcare NLP, and the platform inherits that
  focus on regulatory requirements. **HIPAA** and **GDPR** compliance
  features are built-in – all data processing is local, audit logs are
  kept for interactions, and no PHI is transmitted externally.
  Deployment options can also support **21 CFR Part 11**compliance for
  life science workflows (e.g., clinical trial settings requiring audit
  trails). The system logs user queries and the sources used to
  formulate answers, enabling a complete audit trail for any information
  provided. Role-based access controls restrict who can view or query
  certain datasets, which is crucial for patient privacy and research
  protocols. Furthermore, John Snow Labs regularly undergoes third-party
  security assessments; the company’s solutions are trusted by leading
  pharma, hospitals, and government agencies, indicating the maturity of
  their compliance posture.

- **Integration & Governance:** DeepLens integrates smoothly into
  clinical workflows and IT ecosystems. It provides **REST API and SDK
  access**, so it can be invoked from EHR systems, messaging apps, or
  custom portals. For example, a health system can embed the chatbot
  into its physician portal, or a pharma CRM can call the API to answer
  patient questions with approved data. **Single Sign-On (SSO)** support
  allows using your enterprise identity management for user
  authentication. The platform also supports multi-tenant setups for
  large organizations, separating data by department or project. All AI
  outputs can be **traced and audited** – if an answer was generated,
  you can see exactly which documents and references contributed. This
  level of control and transparency is essential for building trust in
  AI within a clinical setting. In short, DeepLens is not a black box
  cloud API; it’s a **controlled, enterprise AI platform** that fits
  within the healthcare IT and compliance framework.

- **Performance and Scaling:** Deployments of DeepLens can scale to
  handle **large volumes of data and queries**. The architecture
  supports distributed computing (e.g., using Apache Spark if needed in
  the NLP pipeline layer) to index and search very large document sets.
  The system demonstrated the capability to process **hundreds of
  documents in minutes** during literature review tests (e.g., indexing
  271 medical papers in ~7 minutes). It can also be scaled horizontally
  to serve many simultaneous chat sessions – important for
  patient-facing scenarios with high concurrency. Despite using large
  models, DeepLens optimizes resource usage through techniques like
  model quantization and load-balancing inference across GPUs/CPUs.
  Organizations can therefore start with a pilot on modest hardware and
  scale up to cluster deployments as adoption grows. John Snow Labs
  provides containerized deployments and reference architectures to ease
  this scaling process. Crucially, scaling up doesn’t compromise
  compliance: whether running on one server or a hundred, the data stays
  within the controlled environment. This means healthcare providers can
  confidently roll out AI assistance broadly (e.g., to all clinicians or
  patients) without data privacy trade-offs.

### **Real-World Use Cases**

DeepLens is already being applied in real-world settings to improve care
and efficiency. Here are a few examples and pilot projects demonstrating
its impact:

- **Medical Literature Review at Scale:** A global pharmaceutical
  company’s research team used DeepLens to create an **automated
  literature review assistant**. By uploading a collection of oncology
  research papers, researchers could ask specific questions (e.g., “What
  are the reported side effects of Drug X in recent trials?”) and get
  answers synthesized from hundreds of publications. The system could
  analyze ~270 papers in minutes, extracting key findings and even
  highlighting evidence with color-coded confidence. This dramatically
  reduced the time required for researchers to gather insights for drug
  development. What used to take weeks of manual reading now takes an
  afternoon, accelerating the pipeline of scientific discovery.
  *\[Placeholder: As a result, the team reported a 50% reduction in time
  to produce safety reports\]*.

- **Clinical Guidelines Assistant:** In partnership with Guideline
  Central (a leading provider of clinical practice guidelines), John
  Snow Labs deployed DeepLens as an **intelligent clinical assistant**
  for guideline compliance. This AI agent can automatically match a
  given patient’s case to the appropriate clinical guidelines. For
  example, a doctor can input an unstructured summary of a patient (e.g.
  demographics, symptoms, lab results), and DeepLens will identify which
  guideline (or set of guidelines) is relevant – say, an ASTHMA
  management guideline – and pull out the key recommended actions for
  that scenario. It understands even complex guideline content
  (including interpreting tables or flowcharts) and surfaces the
  pertinent recommendations in an easy Q&A format. This pilot addresses
  the problem that busy providers often **can’t keep up with constantly
  evolving guidelines**. Now, at the point of care, a physician can get
  instant, guideline-based advice tailored to their patient. According
  to Guideline Central’s clinical informatics director, **delivering
  up-to-date guidelines in a fast, intuitive way** via this AI assistant
  helps ensure optimal care is offered consistently. This use case shows
  DeepLens enabling *evidence-based medicine on the frontline*– bridging
  the gap between extensive medical knowledge and practical decision
  support.

- 

- **Clinical Coding and Documentation Support:** West Virginia
  University Medicine (WVU) implemented John Snow Labs’ NLP models (as
  used in DeepLens) to improve their **HCC coding process** for risk
  adjustment. Unstructured EMR notes were analyzed to automatically
  identify diagnoses that map to Hierarchical Condition Category codes,
  which are important for insurance reimbursement. The system extracted
  relevant conditions from clinical notes and suggested HCC codes to
  physicians via an alert, speeding up a traditionally manual task. This
  deployment (presented at the NLP Summit 2024) showed that AI can comb
  through charts to find documentation gaps, ensuring conditions are
  properly coded without burdening providers. It’s a real-world
  validation of the same coding capabilities that DeepLens offers
  interactively. By surfacing “missed” diagnoses that need coding, the
  tool not only improves revenue integrity but ultimately supports
  better care (since an accurately coded problem list means a more
  complete picture of patient health). WVU’s success demonstrates how
  domain-trained NLP models can be plugged into hospital workflows to
  deliver tangible ROI and care quality improvements. DeepLens packages
  those same capabilities in a user-friendly chatbot format, which could
  be used by coders or clinicians on demand (e.g., asking “What HCC
  codes apply for this patient’s conditions?” and getting instant
  answers).

These examples illustrate DeepLens in action: **accelerating research,
guiding clinical decisions, automating routine tasks, and enhancing
patient engagement**. Many other organizations are exploring similar use
cases – from pharma companies using it to answer complex medical
information queries in patient support programs, to academic medical
centers leveraging it for clinical trial recruitment Q&A. As deployments
expand, they consistently find that a healthcare-specific conversational
AI like DeepLens can safely augment human expertise, yielding faster
processes and informed decisions while keeping humans in the loop for
oversight.

### **Customer Proof Points**

John Snow Labs’ DeepLens has been recognized and validated by industry
leaders for its innovation and efficacy in healthcare AI:

- **Award-Winning Solution:** DeepLens and its underlying technology
  have earned industry accolades. It was named the *“Best Generative AI
  in Healthcare Solution” (2024)* by Corporate Vision, and received the
  *Global 100 Award 2024 for “Best Medical Application of Large Language
  Models.”* These awards reflect peer recognition that DeepLens is a
  standout product addressing the unique challenges of healthcare with
  generative AI. Additionally, John Snow Labs was honored with the
  **2025 Oracle Excellence Award for AI Innovation**, underscoring how
  its solutions (including the medical chatbot) are driving tangible
  improvements in the field.

- **Oracle Partnership & Testimonial:** The SaaS edition of the medical
  chatbot is deployed on **Oracle’s Cloud Infrastructure (OCI)** to
  serve users with high performance. Oracle’s infrastructure team worked
  closely with John Snow Labs to optimize the models on OCI GPU
  clusters, achieving *millisecond-level response times with full data
  isolation*. *“The SaaS version of our medical chatbot is live, with
  models tuned and deployed on OCI’s high-performance AI infrastructure.
  OCI’s advanced security features help us comply with global and
  industry-specific regulations,”* says Alina Trambitas-Miron, Head of
  Product at John Snow Labs. This collaboration ensured that even the
  cloud-hosted version meets enterprise security standards. An Oracle
  case study noted that after deploying on OCI, the chatbot saw improved
  latency and was able to scale reliably and securely to accelerate R&D
  and ultimately improve patient outcomes. For prospective customers,
  this is proof that DeepLens can be trusted in production at scale, and
  that major tech providers vouch for its architecture.

- 

- **Quantifiable Improvements:** DeepLens transforms functional medicine
  practice efficiency by providing instant access to over 250 million
  peer-reviewed medical articles that are refreshed daily, eliminating
  the traditional hours spent manually searching and cross-referencing
  current research. The platform's intelligent parsing and
  auto-extraction capabilities convert static lab reports into dynamic
  clinical insights, moving practitioners from time-intensive manual
  data interpretation to receiving "nuanced, research-backed insights in
  seconds."

Traditional lab analysis demands significant time and mental energy as
practitioners connect complex biomarker patterns across systems biology
while cross-referencing the latest research. DeepLens addresses this
bottleneck by automatically scanning and extracting relevant data points
from complex reports, then contextually integrating these findings with
case notes to surface hidden correlations and illuminate pathways for
root cause analysis.

The platform's multi-agentic reasoning architecture enables
practitioners to spend less time on manual data entry and
interpretation, redirecting focus toward direct patient care and deeper
clinical reasoning. By delivering evidence-based insights through its
natural language interface and providing full source traceability for
independent validation, DeepLens reduces the cognitive burden of
literature review while maintaining the clinical depth and accuracy
essential to functional medicine practice.

- **Partner Ecosystem:** DeepLens is complemented by an ecosystem of
  content and technology partners. The Guideline Central integration is
  one example where curated medical content is licensed and fed into the
  chatbot to enhance its utility. John Snow Labs also acquired clinical
  knowledge graph company **WiseCube** in 2025 to further enrich the
  knowledge that DeepLens draws on. This means customers benefit not
  only from John Snow Labs’ expertise but also from a growing network of
  integrated data sources (e.g., clinical guidelines, drug databases)
  and tools (e.g., the Generative AI Lab for model tuning). The strong
  partner network and continuous content updates ensure DeepLens stays
  **on the cutting edge of medical knowledge** and can be tailored to
  specific use cases with domain experts in the loop.

In summary, the **proof points from customers and partners** show that
DeepLens is **delivering value in real workflows**. It has the
endorsement of technology providers like Oracle, the recognition of
industry awards, and the approval of clinicians and stakeholders who
have tested it. As one early adopter said, *“DeepLens enabled us to do
in minutes what used to take us days – and we did it without sacrificing
accuracy or privacy.”* **\[Functional Mind\]**. These successes give
confidence that DeepLens is not just an AI demo, but a **trusted
enterprise solution** making a difference in healthcare today.

### **Relevant Resources**

- **Product Page:** [Medical
  Chatbot](https://www.johnsnowlabs.com/medical-chatbot)

- **DeepWiki Info Page:** [Medical Chatbot -
  DeepWiki](https://deepwiki.com/JohnSnowLabs/johnsnowlabs/4.2-medical-chatbot)

- **Webinars:** [Medical Chatbot -
  Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qg7pRwx3NaY&list=PL5zieHHAlvApK9cIxr_xuaq2Q0wPAnLcP)

- **Presentation:**

- **Peer-Reviewed Paper:**

- **Blog Link:**
  [Automating-literature-reviews-streamlining-medical-research-with-ai](https://www.johnsnowlabs.com/automating-literature-reviews-streamlining-medical-research-with-ai)
